The Security, Privacy and Compliance pillar in the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework provides recommendations to help you design, deploy, and operate cloud workloads that meet your requirements for security, privacy, and compliance.

This document is designed to offer valuable insights and meet the needs of a range of security professionals and engineers. The following table describes the intended audiences for this document:

Audience	What this document provides
Chief information security officers (CISOs), business unit leaders, and IT managers	A general framework to establish and maintain security excellence in the cloud and to ensure a comprehensive view of security areas to make informed decisions about security investments.
Security architects and engineers	Key security practices for the design and operational phases to help ensure that solutions are designed for security, efficiency, and scalability.
DevSecOps teams	Guidance to incorporate overarching security controls to plan automation that enables secure and reliable infrastructure.
Compliance officers and risk managers	Key security recommendations to follow a structured approach to risk management with safeguards that help to meet compliance obligations.
To ensure that your Google Cloud workloads meet your security, privacy, and compliance requirements, all of the stakeholders in your organization must adopt a collaborative approach. In addition, you must recognize that cloud security is a shared responsibility between you and Google. For more information, see Shared responsibilities and shared fate on Google Cloud.

The recommendations in this pillar are grouped into core security principles. Each principle-based recommendation is mapped to one or more of the focus areas of cloud security that might be critical to your organization. Each recommendation highlights guidance about the use and configuration of Google Cloud products and capabilities to help improve your organization's security posture.

Core principles
The recommendations in this pillar are grouped within the following core principles of security. Every principle in this pillar is important. Depending on the requirements of your organization and workload, you might choose to prioritize certain principles.

Implement security by design: Integrate cloud security and network security considerations starting from the initial design phase of your applications and infrastructure. Google Cloud provides architecture blueprints and recommendations to help you apply this principle.
Implement zero trust: Use a never trust, always verify approach, where access to resources is granted based on continuous verification of trust. Google Cloud supports this principle through products like Chrome Enterprise Premium and Identity-Aware Proxy (IAP).
Implement shift-left security: Implement security controls early in the software development lifecycle. Avoid security defects before system changes are made. Detect and fix security bugs early, fast, and reliably after the system changes are committed. Google Cloud supports this principle through products like Cloud Build, Binary Authorization, and Artifact Registry.
Implement preemptive cyber defense: Adopt a proactive approach to security by implementing robust fundamental measures like threat intelligence. This approach helps you build a foundation for more effective threat detection and response. Google Cloud's approach to layered security controls aligns with this principle.
Use AI securely and responsibly: Develop and deploy AI systems in a responsible and secure manner. The recommendations for this principle are aligned with guidance in the AI and ML perspective of the Well-Architected Framework and in Google's Secure AI Framework (SAIF).
Use AI for security: Use AI capabilities to improve your existing security systems and processes through Gemini in Security and overall platform-security capabilities. Use AI as a tool to increase the automation of remedial work and ensure security hygiene to make other systems more secure.
Meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs: Adhere to industry-specific regulations, compliance standards, and privacy requirements. Google Cloud helps you meet these obligations through products like Assured Workloads, Organization Policy Service, and our compliance resource center.
Organizational security mindset
A security-focused organizational mindset is crucial for successful cloud adoption and operation. This mindset should be deeply ingrained in your organization's culture and reflected in its practices, which are guided by core security principles as described earlier.

An organizational security mindset emphasizes that you think about security during system design, assume zero trust, and integrate security features throughout your development process. In this mindset, you also think proactively about cyber-defense measures, use AI securely and for security, and consider your regulatory, privacy, and compliance requirements. By embracing these principles, your organization can cultivate a security-first culture that proactively addresses threats, protects valuable assets, and helps to ensure responsible technology usage.

Focus areas of cloud security
This section describes the areas for you to focus on when you plan, implement, and manage security for your applications, systems, and data. The recommendations in each principle of this pillar are relevant to one or more of these focus areas. Throughout the rest of this document, the recommendations specify the corresponding security focus areas to provide further clarity and context.

Focus area	Activities and components	Related Google Cloud products, capabilities, and solutions
Infrastructure security	
Secure network infrastructure.
Encrypt data in transit and at rest.
Control traffic flow.
Secure IaaS and PaaS services.
Protect against unauthorized access.
Firewall Policies
VPC Service Controls
Google Cloud Armor
Cloud Next Generation Firewall
Secure Web Proxy
Identity and access management	
Use authentication, authorization, and access controls.
Manage cloud identities.
Manage identity and access management policies.
Cloud Identity
Google's Identity and Access Management (IAM) service
Workforce Identity Federation
Workload Identity Federation
Data security	
Store data in Google Cloud securely.
Control access to the data.
Discover and classify the data.
Design necessary controls, such as encryption, access controls, and data loss prevention.
Protect data at rest, in transit, and in use.
Google's IAM service
Sensitive Data Protection
VPC Service Controls
Cloud KMS
Confidential Computing
AI and ML security	
Apply security controls at different layers of the AI and ML infrastructure and pipeline.
Ensure model safety.
Google's SAIF
Model Armor
Security operations (SecOps)	
Adopt a modern SecOps platform and set of practices, for effective incident management, threat detection, and response processes.
Monitor systems and applications continuously for security events.
Google Security Operations
Application security	
Secure applications against software vulnerabilities and attacks.
Artifact Registry
Artifact Analysis
Binary Authorization
Assured Open Source Software
Google Cloud Armor
Web Security Scanner
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance	
Establish policies, procedures, and controls to manage cloud resources effectively and securely.
Organization Policy Service
Cloud Asset Inventory
Security Command Center Enterprise
Resource Manager
Logging, auditing, and monitoring	
Analyze logs to identify potential threats.
Track and record system activities for compliance and security analysis.
Cloud Logging
Cloud Monitoring
Cloud Audit Logs
VPC Flow Logs
Contributors
Authors:

Wade Holmes | Global Solutions Director
Hector Diaz | Cloud Security Architect
Carlos Leonardo Rosario | Google Cloud Security Specialist
John Bacon | Partner Solutions Architect
Sachin Kalra | Global Security Solution Manager
Other contributors:

Anton Chuvakin | Security Advisor, Office of the CISO
Daniel Lees | Cloud Security Architect
Filipe Gracio, PhD | Customer Engineer, AI/ML Specialist
Gary Harmson | Principal Architect
Gino Pelliccia | Principal Architect
Jose Andrade | Customer Engineer, SRE Specialist
Kumar Dhanagopal | Cross-Product Solution Developer
Laura Hyatt | Customer Engineer, FSI
Marwan Al Shawi | Partner Customer Engineer
Nicolas Pintaux | Customer Engineer, Application Modernization Specialist
Noah McDonald | Cloud Security Consultant
Osvaldo Costa | Networking Specialist Customer Engineer
Radhika Kanakam | Program Lead, Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework
Samantha He | Technical Writer
Susan Wu | Outbound Product Manager

Implement security by design
This principle in the security pillar of the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework provides recommendations to incorporate robust security features, controls, and practices into the design of your cloud applications, services, and platforms. From ideation to operations, security is more effective when it's embedded as an integral part of every stage of your design process.

Principle overview
As explained in An Overview of Google's Commitment to Secure by Design, secure by default and secure by design are often used interchangeably, but they represent distinct approaches to building secure systems. Both approaches aim to minimize vulnerabilities and enhance security, but they differ in scope and implementation:

Secure by default: focuses on ensuring that a system's default settings are set to a secure mode, minimizing the need for users or administrators to take actions to secure the system. This approach aims to provide a baseline level of security for all users.
Secure by design: emphasizes proactively incorporating security considerations throughout a system's development lifecycle. This approach is about anticipating potential threats and vulnerabilities early and making design choices that mitigate risks. This approach involves using secure coding practices, conducting security reviews, and embedding security throughout the design process. The secure-by-design approach is an overarching philosophy that guides the development process and helps to ensure that security isn't an afterthought but is an integral part of a system's design.
Recommendations
To implement the secure by design principle for your cloud workloads, consider the recommendations in the following sections:

Choose system components that help to secure your workloads
Build a layered security approach
Use hardened and attested infrastructure and services
Encrypt data at rest and in transit
Choose system components that help to secure your workloads
This recommendation is relevant to all of the focus areas.

A fundamental decision for effective security is the selection of robust system components—including both hardware and software components—that constitute your platform, solution, or service. To reduce the security attack surface and limit potential damage, you must also carefully consider the deployment patterns of these components and their configurations.

In your application code, we recommend that you use straightforward, safe, and reliable libraries, abstractions, and application frameworks in order to eliminate classes of vulnerabilities. To scan for vulnerabilities in software libraries, you can use third-party tools. You can also use Assured Open Source Software, which helps to reduce risks to your software supply chain by using open source software (OSS) packages that Google uses and secures.

Your infrastructure must use networking, storage, and compute options that support safe operation and align with your security requirements and risk acceptance levels. Infrastructure security is important for both internet-facing and internal workloads.

For information about other Google solutions that support this recommendation, see Implement shift-left security.

Build a layered security approach
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

AI and ML security
Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
We recommend that you implement security at each layer of your application and infrastructure stack by applying a defense-in-depth approach.

Use the security features in each component of your platform. To limit access and identify the boundaries of the potential impact (that is, the blast radius) in the event of a security incident, do the following:

Simplify your system's design to accommodate flexibility where possible.
Document the security requirements of each component.
Incorporate a robust secured mechanism to address resiliency and recovery requirements.
When you design the security layers, perform a risk assessment to determine the security features that you need in order to meet internal security requirements and external regulatory requirements. We recommend that you use an industry-standard risk assessment framework that applies to cloud environments and that is relevant to your regulatory requirements. For example, the Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) provides the Cloud Controls Matrix (CCM). Your risk assessment provides you with a catalog of risks and corresponding security controls to mitigate them.

When you perform the risk assessment, remember that you have a shared responsibility arrangement with your cloud provider. Therefore, your risks in a cloud environment differ from your risks in an on-premises environment. For example, in an on-premises environment, you need to mitigate vulnerabilities to your hardware stack. In contrast, in a cloud environment, the cloud provider bears these risks. Also, remember that the boundaries of shared responsibilities differ between IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS services for each cloud provider.

After you identify potential risks, you must design and create a mitigation plan that uses technical, administrative, and operational controls, as well as contractual protections and third-party attestations. In addition, a threat modeling method, such as the OWASP application threat modeling method, helps you to identify potential gaps and suggest actions to address the gaps.

Use hardened and attested infrastructure and services
This recommendation is relevant to all of the focus areas.

A mature security program mitigates new vulnerabilities as described in security bulletins. The security program should also provide remediation to fix vulnerabilities in existing deployments and secure your VM and container images. You can use hardening guides that are specific to the OS and application of your images, as well as benchmarks like the one provided by the Center of Internet Security (CIS).

If you use custom images for your Compute Engine VMs, you need to patch the images yourself. Alternatively, you can use Google-provided curated OS images, which are patched regularly. To run containers on Compute Engine VMs, use Google-curated Container-optimized OS images. Google regularly patches and updates these images.

If you use GKE, we recommend that you enable node auto-upgrades so that Google updates your cluster nodes with the latest patches. Google manages GKE control planes, which are automatically updated and patched. To further reduce the attack surface of your containers, you can use distroless images. Distroless images are ideal for security-sensitive applications, microservices, and situations where minimizing the image size and attack surface is paramount.

For sensitive workloads, use Shielded VM, which prevents malicious code from being loaded during the VM boot cycle. Shielded VM instances provide boot security, monitor integrity, and use the Virtual Trusted Platform Module (vTPM).

To help secure SSH access, OS Login lets your employees connect to your VMs by using Identity and Access Management (IAM) permissions as the source of truth instead of relying on SSH keys. Therefore, you don't need to manage SSH keys throughout your organization. OS Login ties an administrator's access to their employee lifecycle, so when employees change roles or leave your organization, their access is revoked with their account. OS Login also supports Google two-factor authentication, which adds an extra layer of security against account takeover attacks.

In GKE, application instances run within Docker containers. To enable a defined risk profile and to restrict employees from making changes to containers, ensure that your containers are stateless and immutable. The immutability principle means that your employees don't modify the container or access it interactively. If the container must be changed, you build a new image and redeploy that image. Enable SSH access to the underlying containers only in specific debugging scenarios.

To help globally secure configurations across your environment, you can use organization policies to set constraints or guardrails on resources that affect the behavior of your cloud assets. For example, you can define the following organization policies and apply them either globally across a Google Cloud organization or selectively at the level of a folder or project:

Disable external IP address allocation to VMs.
Restrict resource creation to specific geographical locations.
Disable the creation of Service Accounts or their keys.
Encrypt data at rest and in transit
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Infrastructure security
Data security
Data encryption is a foundational control to protect sensitive information, and it's a key part of data governance. An effective data protection strategy includes access control, data segmentation and geographical residency, auditing, and encryption implementation that's based on a careful assessment of requirements.

By default, Google Cloud encrypts customer data that's stored at rest, with no action required from you. In addition to default encryption, Google Cloud provides options for envelope encryption and encryption key management. You must identify the solutions that best fit your requirements for key generation, storage, and rotation, whether you're choosing the keys for your storage, for compute, or for big data workloads. For example, Customer-managed encryption keys (CMEKs) can be created in Cloud Key Management Service (Cloud KMS). The CMEKs can be either software-based or HSM-protected to meet your regulatory or compliance requirements, such as the need to rotate encryption keys regularly. Cloud KMS Autokey lets you automate the provisioning and assignment of CMEKs. In addition, you can bring your own keys that are sourced from a third-party key management system by using Cloud External Key Manager (Cloud EKM).

We strongly recommend that data be encrypted in-transit. Google encrypts and authenticates data in transit at one or more network layers when data moves outside physical boundaries that aren't controlled by Google or on behalf of Google. All VM-to-VM traffic within a VPC network and between peered VPC networks is encrypted. You can use MACsec for encryption of traffic over Cloud Interconnect connections. IPsec provides encryption for traffic over Cloud VPN connections. You can protect application-to-application traffic in the cloud by using security features like TLS and mTLS configurations in Apigee and Cloud Service Mesh for containerized applications.

By default, Google Cloud encrypts data at rest and data in transit across the network. However, data isn't encrypted by default while it's in use in memory. If your organization handles confidential data, you need to mitigate any threats that undermine the confidentiality and integrity of either the application or the data in system memory. To mitigate these threats, you can use Confidential Computing, which provides a trusted execution environment for your compute workloads. For more information, see Confidential VM overview.


Implement zero trust
This principle in the security pillar of the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework helps you ensure comprehensive security across your cloud workloads. The principle of zero trust emphasizes the following practices:

Eliminating implicit trust
Applying the principle of least privilege to access control
Enforcing explicit validation of all access requests
Adopting an assume-breach mindset to enable continuous verification and security posture monitoring
Principle overview
The zero-trust model shifts the security focus from perimeter-based security to an approach where no user or device is considered to be inherently trustworthy. Instead, every access request must be verified, regardless of its origin. This approach involves authenticating and authorizing every user and device, validating their context (location and device posture), and granting least privilege access to only the necessary resources.

Implementing the zero-trust model helps your organization enhance its security posture by minimizing the impact of potential breaches and protecting sensitive data and applications against unauthorized access. The zero-trust model helps you ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data and resources in the cloud.

Recommendations
To implement the zero-trust model for your cloud workloads, consider the recommendations in the following sections:

Secure your network
Verify every access attempt explicitly
Monitor and maintain your network
Secure your network
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Infrastructure security.

Transitioning from conventional perimeter-based security to a zero-trust model requires multiple steps. Your organization might have already integrated certain zero-trust controls into its security posture. However, a zero-trust model isn't a singular product or solution. Instead, it's a holistic integration of multiple security layers and best practices. This section describes recommendations and techniques to implement zero trust for network security.

Access control: Enforce access controls based on user identity and context by using solutions like Chrome Enterprise Premium and Identity-Aware Proxy (IAP). By doing this, you shift security from the network perimeter to individual users and devices. This approach enables granular access control and reduces the attack surface.
Network security: Secure network connections between your on-premises, Google Cloud, and multicloud environments.
Use the private connectivity methods from Cloud Interconnect and IPsec VPNs.
To help secure access to Google Cloud services and APIs, use Private Service Connect.
To help secure outbound access from workloads deployed on Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) and related products, use Cloud Service Mesh egress gateways.
Network design: Prevent potential security risks by deleting default networks in existing projects and disabling the creation of default networks in new projects.
To avoid conflicts, plan your network and IP address allocation carefully.
To enforce effective access control, limit the number of Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) networks per project.
Segmentation: Isolate workloads but maintain centralized network management.
To segment your network, use Shared VPC.
Define firewall policies and rules at the organization, folder, and VPC network levels.
To prevent data exfiltration, establish secure perimeters around sensitive data and services by using VPC Service Controls.
Perimeter security: Protect against DDoS attacks and web application threats.
To protect against threats, use Google Cloud Armor.
Configure security policies to allow, deny, or redirect traffic at the Google Cloud edge.
Automation: Automate infrastructure provisioning by embracing infrastructure as code (IaC) principles and by using tools like Terraform, Jenkins, and Cloud Build. IaC helps to ensure consistent security configurations, simplified deployments, and rapid rollbacks in case of issues.
Secure foundation: Establish a secure application environment by using the Enterprise foundations blueprint. This blueprint provides prescriptive guidance and automation scripts to help you implement security best practices and configure your Google Cloud resources securely.
Verify every access attempt explicitly
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Identity and access management
Security operations (SecOps)
Logging, auditing, and monitoring
Implement strong authentication and authorization mechanisms for any user, device, or service that attempts to access your cloud resources. Don't rely on location or network perimeter as a security control. Don't automatically trust any user, device, or service, even if they are already inside the network. Instead, every attempt to access resources must be rigorously authenticated and authorized. You must implement strong identity verification measures, such as multi-factor authentication (MFA). You must also ensure that access decisions are based on granular policies that consider various contextual factors like user role, device posture, and location.

To implement this recommendation, use the following methods, tools, and technologies:

Unified identity management: Ensure consistent identity management across your organization by using a single identity provider (IdP).
Google Cloud supports federation with most IdPs, including on-premises Active Directory. Federation lets you extend your existing identity management infrastructure to Google Cloud and enable single sign-on (SSO) for users.
If you don't have an existing IdP, consider using Cloud Identity Premium or Google Workspace.
Limited service account permissions: Use service accounts carefully, and adhere to the principle of least privilege.
Grant only the necessary permissions required for each service account to perform its designated tasks.
Use Workload Identity Federation for applications that run on Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) or run outside Google Cloud to access resources securely.
Robust processes: Update your identity processes to align with cloud security best practices.
To help ensure compliance with regulatory requirements, implement identity governance to track access, risks, and policy violations.
Review and update your existing processes for granting and auditing access-control roles and permissions.
Strong authentication: Implement SSO for user authentication and implement MFA for privileged accounts.
Google Cloud supports various MFA methods, including Titan Security Keys, for enhanced security.
For workload authentication, use OAuth 2.0 or signed JSON Web Tokens (JWTs).
Least privilege: Minimize the risk of unauthorized access and data breaches by enforcing the principles of least privilege and separation of duties.
Avoid overprovisioning user access.
Consider implementing just-in-time privileged access for sensitive operations.
Logging: Enable audit logging for administrator and data access activities.
For analysis and threat detection, scan the logs by using Security Command Center Enterprise or Google Security Operations.
Configure appropriate log retention policies to balance security needs with storage costs.
Monitor and maintain your network
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Logging, auditing, and monitoring
Application security
Security operations (SecOps)
Infrastructure security
When you plan and implement security measures, assume that an attacker is already inside your environment. This proactive approach involves using the following multiple tools and techniques to provide visibility into your network:

Centralized logging and monitoring: Collect and analyze security logs from all of your cloud resources through centralized logging and monitoring.

Establish baselines for normal network behavior, detect anomalies, and identify potential threats.
Continuously analyze network traffic flows to identify suspicious patterns and potential attacks.
Insights into network performance and security: Use tools like Network Analyzer. Monitor traffic for unusual protocols, unexpected connections, or sudden spikes in data transfer, which could indicate malicious activity.

Vulnerability scanning and remediation: Regularly scan your network and applications for vulnerabilities.

Use Web Security Scanner, which can automatically identify vulnerabilities in your Compute Engine instances, containers, and GKE clusters.
Prioritize remediation based on the severity of vulnerabilities and their potential impact on your systems.
Intrusion detection: Monitor network traffic for malicious activity and automatically block or get alerts for suspicious events by using Cloud IDS and Cloud NGFW intrusion prevention service.

Security analysis: Consider implementing Google SecOps to correlate security events from various sources, provide real-time analysis of security alerts, and facilitate incident response.

Consistent configurations: Ensure that you have consistent security configurations across your network by using configuration management tools.


Implement shift-left security
This principle in the security pillar of the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework helps you identify practical controls that you can implement early in the software development lifecycle to improve your security posture. It provides recommendations that help you implement preventive security guardrails and post-deployment security controls.

Principle overview
Shift-left security means adopting security practices early in the software development lifecycle. This principle has the following goals:

Avoid security defects before system changes are made. Implement preventive security guardrails and adopt practices such as infrastructure as code (IaC), policy as code, and security checks in the CI/CD pipeline. You can also use other platform-specific capabilities like Organization Policy Service and hardened GKE clusters in Google Cloud.
Detect and fix security bugs early, fast, and reliably after any system changes are committed. Adopt practices like code reviews, post-deployment vulnerability scanning, and security testing.
The Implement security by design and shift-left security principles are related but they differ in scope. The security-by-design principle helps you to avoid fundamental design flaws that would require re-architecting the entire system. For example, a threat-modeling exercise reveals that the current design doesn't include an authorization policy, and all users would have the same level of access without it. Shift-left security helps you to avoid implementation defects (bugs and misconfigurations) before changes are applied, and it enables fast, reliable fixes after deployment.

Recommendations
To implement the shift-left security principle for your cloud workloads, consider the recommendations in the following sections:

Adopt preventive security controls
Automate provisioning and management of cloud resources
Automate secure application releases
Ensure that application deployments follow approved processes
Scan for known vulnerabilities before application deployment
Monitor your application code for known vulnerabilities
Adopt preventive security controls
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Identity and access management
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
Preventive security controls are crucial for maintaining a strong security posture in the cloud. These controls help you proactively mitigate risks. You can prevent misconfigurations and unauthorized access to resources, enable developers to work efficiently, and help ensure compliance with industry standards and internal policies.

Preventive security controls are more effective when they're implemented by using infrastructure as code (IaC). With IaC, preventive security controls can include more customized checks on the infrastructure code before changes are deployed. When combined with automation, preventive security controls can run as part of your CI/CD pipeline's automatic checks.

The following products and Google Cloud capabilities can help you implement preventive controls in your environment:

Organization Policy Service constraints: configure predefined and custom constraints with centralized control.
VPC Service Controls: create perimeters around your Google Cloud services.
Identity and Access Management (IAM), Privileged Access Manager, and principal access boundary policies: restrict access to resources.
Policy Controller and Open Policy Agent (OPA): enforce IaC constraints in your CI/CD pipeline and avoid cloud misconfigurations.
IAM lets you authorize who can act on specific resources based on permissions. For more information, see Access control for organization resources with IAM.

Organization Policy Service lets you set restrictions on resources to specify how they can be configured. For example, you can use an organization policy to do the following:

Limit resource sharing based on domain.
Limit the use of service accounts.
Restrict the physical location of newly created resources.
In addition to using organizational policies, you can restrict access to resources by using the following methods:

Tags with IAM: assign a tag to a set of resources and then set the access definition for the tag itself, rather than defining the access permissions on each resource.
IAM Conditions: define conditional, attribute-based access control for resources.
Defense in depth: use VPC Service Controls to further restrict access to resources.
For more information about resource management, see Decide a resource hierarchy for your Google Cloud landing zone.

Automate provisioning and management of cloud resources
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Application security
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
Automating the provisioning and management of cloud resources and workloads is more effective when you also adopt declarative IaC, as opposed to imperative scripting. IaC isn't a security tool or practice on its own, but it helps you to improve the security of your platform. Adopting IaC lets you create repeatable infrastructure and provides your operations team with a known good state. IaC also improves the efficiency of rollbacks, audit changes, and troubleshooting.

When combined with CI/CD pipelines and automation, IaC also gives you the ability to adopt practices such as policy as code with tools like OPA. You can audit infrastructure changes over time and run automatic checks on the infrastructure code before changes are deployed.

To automate the infrastructure deployment, you can use tools like Config Controller, Terraform, Jenkins, and Cloud Build. To help you build a secure application environment using IaC and automation, Google Cloud provides the enterprise foundations blueprint. This blueprint is Google's opinionated design that follows all of our recommended practices and configurations. The blueprint provides step-by-step instructions to configure and deploy your Google Cloud topology by using Terraform and Cloud Build.

You can modify the scripts of the enterprise foundations blueprint to configure an environment that follows Google recommendations and meets your own security requirements. You can further build on the blueprint with additional blueprints or design your own automation. The Google Cloud Architecture Center provides other blueprints that can be implemented on top of the enterprise foundations blueprint. The following are a few examples of these blueprints:

Deploy an enterprise developer platform on Google Cloud
Deploy a secured serverless architecture using Cloud Run
Build and deploy generative AI and machine learning models in an enterprise
Import data from Google Cloud into a secured BigQuery data warehouse
Automate secure application releases
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Application security.

Without automated tools, it can be difficult to deploy, update, and patch complex application environments to meet consistent security requirements. We recommend that you build automated CI/CD pipelines for your software development lifecycle (SDLC). Automated CI/CD pipelines help you to remove manual errors, provide standardized development feedback loops, and enable efficient product iterations. Continuous delivery is one of the best practices that the DORA framework recommends.

Automating application releases by using CI/CD pipelines helps to improve your ability to detect and fix security bugs early, fast, and reliably. For example, you can scan for security vulnerabilities automatically when artifacts are created, narrow the scope of security reviews, and roll back to a known and safe version. You can also define policies for different environments (such as development, test, or production environments) so that only verified artifacts are deployed.

To help you automate application releases and embed security checks in your CI/CD pipeline, Google Cloud provides multiple tools including Cloud Build, Cloud Deploy, Web Security Scanner, and Binary Authorization.

To establish a process that verifies multiple security requirements in your SDLC, use the Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA) framework, which has been defined by Google. SLSA requires security checks for source code, build process, and code provenance. Many of these requirements can be included in an automated CI/CD pipeline. To understand how Google applies these practices internally, see Google Cloud's approach to change.

Ensure that application deployments follow approved processes
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Application security.

If an attacker compromises your CI/CD pipeline, your entire application stack can be affected. To help secure the pipeline, you should enforce an established approval process before you deploy the code into production.

If you use Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) or Cloud Run, you can establish an approval process by using Binary Authorization. Binary Authorization attaches configurable signatures to container images. These signatures (also called attestations) help to validate the image. At deployment time, Binary Authorization uses these attestations to determine whether a process was completed. For example, you can use Binary Authorization to do the following:

Verify that a specific build system or CI pipeline created a container image.
Validate that a container image is compliant with a vulnerability signing policy.
Verify that a container image passes the criteria for promotion to the next deployment environment, such as from development to QA.
By using Binary Authorization, you can enforce that only trusted code runs on your target platforms.

Scan for known vulnerabilities before application deployment
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Application security.

We recommend that you use automated tools that can continuously perform vulnerability scans on application artifacts before they're deployed to production.

For containerized applications, use Artifact Analysis to automatically run vulnerability scans for container images. Artifact Analysis scans new images when they're uploaded to Artifact Registry. The scan extracts information about the system packages in the container. After the initial scan, Artifact Analysis continuously monitors the metadata of scanned images in Artifact Registry for new vulnerabilities. When Artifact Analysis receives new and updated vulnerability information from vulnerability sources, it does the following:

Updates the metadata of the scanned images to keep them up to date.
Creates new vulnerability occurrences for new notes.
Deletes vulnerability occurrences that are no longer valid.
Monitor your application code for known vulnerabilities
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Application security.

Use automated tools to constantly monitor your application code for known vulnerabilities such as the OWASP Top 10. For more information about Google Cloud products and features that support OWASP Top 10 mitigation techniques, see OWASP Top 10 mitigation options on Google Cloud.

Use Web Security Scanner to help identify security vulnerabilities in your App Engine, Compute Engine, and GKE web applications. The scanner crawls your application, follows all of the links within the scope of your starting URLs, and attempts to exercise as many user inputs and event handlers as possible. It can automatically scan for and detect common vulnerabilities, including cross-site scripting, code injection, mixed content, and outdated or insecure libraries. Web Security Scanner provides early identification of these types of vulnerabilities without distracting you with false positives.

In addition, if you use GKE to manage fleets of Kubernetes clusters, the security posture dashboard shows opinionated, actionable recommendations to help improve your fleet's security posture.


Implement preemptive cyber defense
This principle in the security pillar of the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework provides recommendations to build robust cyber-defense programs as part of your overall security strategy.

This principle emphasizes the use of threat intelligence to proactively guide your efforts across the core cyber-defense functions, as defined in The Defender's Advantage: A guide to activating cyber defense.

Principle overview
When you defend your system against cyber attacks, you have a significant, underutilized advantage against attackers. As the founder of Mandiant states, "You should know more about your business, your systems, your topology, your infrastructure than any attacker does. This is an incredible advantage." To help you use this inherent advantage, this document provides recommendations about proactive and strategic cyber-defense practices that are mapped to the Defender's Advantage framework.

Recommendations
To implement preemptive cyber defense for your cloud workloads, consider the recommendations in the following sections:

Integrate the functions of cyber defense
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
Understand and capitalize on your defender's advantage
Validate and improve your defenses continuously
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts
Integrate the functions of cyber defense
This recommendation is relevant to all of the focus areas.

The Defender's Advantage framework identifies six critical functions of cyber defense: Intelligence, Detect, Respond, Validate, Hunt, and Mission Control. Each function focuses on a unique part of the cyber-defense mission, but these functions must be well-coordinated and work together to provide an effective defense. Focus on building a robust and integrated system where each function supports the others. If you need a phased approach for adoption, consider the following suggested order. Depending on your current cloud maturity, resource topology, and specific threat landscape, you might want to prioritize certain functions.

Intelligence: The Intelligence function guides all the other functions. Understanding the threat landscape—including the most likely attackers, their tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTPs), and the potential impact—is critical to prioritizing actions across the entire program. The Intelligence function is responsible for stakeholder identification, definition of intelligence requirements, data collection, analysis and dissemination, automation, and the creation of a cyber threat profile.
Detect and Respond: These functions make up the core of active defense, which involves identifying and addressing malicious activity. These functions are necessary to act on the intelligence that's gathered by the intelligence function. The Detect function requires a methodical approach that aligns detections to attacker TTPs and ensures robust logging. The Respond function must focus on initial triage, data collection, and incident remediation.
Validate: The Validate function is a continuous process that provides assurance that your security control ecosystem is up-to-date and operating as designed. This function ensures that your organization understands the attack surface, knows where vulnerabilities exist, and measures the effectiveness of controls. Security validation is also an important component of the detection engineering lifecycle and must be used to identify detection gaps and create new detections.
Hunt: The Hunt function involves proactively searching for active threats within an environment. This function must be implemented when your organization has a baseline level of maturity in the Detect and Respond functions. The Hunt function expands the detection capabilities and helps to identify gaps and weaknesses in controls. The Hunt function must be based on specific threats. This advanced function benefits from a foundation of robust intelligence, detection, and response capabilities.
Mission Control: The Mission Control function acts as the central hub that connects all of the other functions. This function is responsible for strategy, communication, and decisive action across your cyber-defense program. It ensures that all of the functions are working together and that they're aligned with your organization's business goals. You must focus on establishing a clear understanding of the purpose of the Mission Control function before you use it to connect the other functions.
Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense
This recommendation is relevant to all of the focus areas.

This recommendation highlights the Intelligence function as a core part of a strong cyber-defense program. Threat intelligence provides knowledge about threat actors, their TTPs, and indicators of compromise (IOCs). This knowledge should inform and prioritize actions across all cyber-defense functions. An intelligence-driven approach helps you align defenses to meet the threats that are most likely to affect your organization. This approach also helps with efficient allocation and prioritization of resources.

The following Google Cloud products and features help you take advantage of threat intelligence to guide your security operations. Use these features to identify and prioritize potential threats, vulnerabilities, and risks, and then plan and implement appropriate actions.

Google Security Operations (Google SecOps) helps you store and analyze security data centrally. Use Google SecOps to map logs into a common model, enrich the logs, and link the logs to timelines for a comprehensive view of attacks. You can also create detection rules, set up IoC matching, and perform threat-hunting activities. The platform also provides curated detections, which are predefined and managed rules to help identify threats. Google SecOps can also integrate with Mandiant frontline intelligence. Google SecOps uniquely integrates industry-leading AI, along with threat intelligence from Mandiant and Google VirusTotal. This integration is critical for threat evaluation and understanding who is targeting your organization and the potential impact.

Security Command Center Enterprise, which is powered by Google AI, enables security professionals to efficiently assess, investigate, and respond to security issues across multiple cloud environments. The security professionals who can benefit from Security Command Center include security operations center (SOC) analysts, vulnerability and posture analysts, and compliance managers. Security Command Center Enterprise enriches security data, assesses risk, and prioritizes vulnerabilities. This solution provides teams with the information that they need to address high-risk vulnerabilities and to remediate active threats.

Chrome Enterprise Premium offers threat and data protection, which helps to protect users from exfiltration risks and prevents malware from getting onto enterprise-managed devices. Chrome Enterprise Premium also provides visibility into unsafe or potentially unsafe activity that can happen within the browser.

Network monitoring, through tools like Network Intelligence Center, provides visibility into network performance. Network monitoring can also help you detect unusual traffic patterns or detect data transfer amounts that might indicate an attack or data exfiltration attempt.

Understand and capitalize on your defender's advantage
This recommendation is relevant to all of the focus areas.

As mentioned earlier, you have an advantage over attackers when you have a thorough understanding of your business, systems, topology, and infrastructure. To capitalize on this knowledge advantage, utilize this data about your environments during cyberdefense planning.

Google Cloud provides the following features to help you proactively gain visibility to identify threats, understand risks, and respond in a timely manner to mitigate potential damage:

Chrome Enterprise Premium helps you enhance security for enterprise devices by protecting users from exfiltration risks. It extends Sensitive Data Protection services into the browser, and prevents malware. It also offers features like protection against malware and phishing to help prevent exposure to unsafe content. In addition, it gives you control over the installation of extensions to help prevent unsafe or unvetted extensions. These capabilities help you establish a secure foundation for your operations.

Security Command Center Enterprise provides a continuous risk engine that offers comprehensive and ongoing risk analysis and management. The risk engine feature enriches security data, assesses risk, and prioritizes vulnerabilities to help fix issues quickly. Security Command Center enables your organization to proactively identify weaknesses and implement mitigations.

Google SecOps centralizes security data and provides enriched logs with timelines. This enables defenders to proactively identify active compromises and adapt defenses based on attackers' behavior.

Network monitoring helps identify irregular network activity that might indicate an attack and it provides early indicators that you can use to take action. To help proactively protect your data from theft, continuously monitor for data exfiltration and use the provided tools.

Validate and improve your defenses continuously
This recommendation is relevant to all of the focus areas.

This recommendation emphasizes the importance of targeted testing and continuous validation of controls to understand strengths and weaknesses across the entire attack surface. This includes validating the effectiveness of controls, operations, and staff through methods like the following:

Penetration tests
Red-blue team and purple team exercises
Tabletop exercises
You must also actively search for threats and use the results to improve detection and visibility. Use the following tools to continuously test and validate your defenses against real-world threats:

Security Command Center Enterprise provides a continuous risk engine to evaluate vulnerabilities and prioritize remediation, which enables ongoing evaluation of your overall security posture. By prioritizing issues, Security Command Center Enterprise helps you to ensure that resources are used effectively.

Google SecOps offers threat-hunting and curated detections that let you proactively identify weaknesses in your controls. This capability enables continuous testing and improvement of your ability to detect threats.

Chrome Enterprise Premium provides threat and data protection features that can help you to address new and evolving threats, and continuously update your defenses against exfiltration risks and malware.

Cloud Next Generation Firewall (Cloud NGFW) provides network monitoring and data-exfiltration monitoring. These capabilities can help you to validate the effectiveness of your current security posture and identify potential weaknesses. Data-exfiltration monitoring helps you to validate the strength of your organization's data protection mechanisms and make proactive adjustments where necessary. When you integrate threat findings from Cloud NGFW with Security Command Center and Google SecOps, you can optimize network-based threat detection, optimize threat response, and automate playbooks. For more information about this integration, see Unifying Your Cloud Defenses: Security Command Center & Cloud NGFW Enterprise.

Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts
This recommendation is relevant to all of the focus areas.

As described earlier in Integrate the functions of cyber defense, the Mission Control function interconnects the other functions of the cyber-defense program. This function enables coordination and unified management across the program. It also helps you coordinate with other teams that don't work on cybersecurity. The Mission Control function promotes empowerment and accountability, facilitates agility and expertise, and drives responsibility and transparency.

The following products and features can help you implement the Mission Control function:

Security Command Center Enterprise acts as a central hub for coordinating and managing your cyber-defense operations. It brings tools, teams, and data together, along with the built-in Google SecOps response capabilities. Security Command Center provides clear visibility into your organization's security state and enables the identification of security misconfigurations across different resources.
Google SecOps provides a platform for teams to respond to threats by mapping logs and creating timelines. You can also define detection rules and search for threats.
Google Workspace and Chrome Enterprise Premium help you to manage and control end-user access to sensitive resources. You can define granular access controls based on user identity and the context of a request.
Network monitoring provides insights into the performance of network resources. You can import network monitoring insights into Security Command Center and Google SecOps for centralized monitoring and correlation against other timeline based data points. This integration helps you to detect and respond to potential network usage changes caused by nefarious activity.
Data-exfiltration monitoring helps to identify possible data loss incidents. With this feature, you can efficiently mobilize an incident response team, assess damages, and limit further data exfiltration. You can also improve current policies and controls to ensure data protection.
Product summary
The following table lists the products and features that are described in this document and maps them to the associated recommendations and security capabilities.

Google Cloud product	Applicable recommendations
Google SecOps	Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense: Enables threat hunting and IoC matching, and integrates with Mandiant for comprehensive threat evaluation.
Understand and capitalize on your defender's advantage: Provides curated detections and centralizes security data for proactive compromise identification.

Validate and improve your defenses continuously: Enables continuous testing and improvement of threat detection capabilities.
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission Control: Provides a platform for threat response, log analysis, and timeline creation.

Security Command Center Enterprise	Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense: Uses AI to assess risk, prioritize vulnerabilities, and provide actionable insights for remediation.
Understand and capitalize on your defender's advantage: Offers comprehensive risk analysis, vulnerability prioritization, and proactive identification of weaknesses.

Validate and improve your defenses continuously: Provides ongoing security posture evaluation and resource prioritization.
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission Control: Acts as a central hub for managing and coordinating cyber-defense operations.

Chrome Enterprise Premium	Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense: Protects users from exfiltration risks, prevents malware, and provides visibility into unsafe browser activity.
Understand and capitalize on your defender's advantage: Enhances security for enterprise devices through data protection, malware prevention, and control over extensions.

Validate and improve your defenses continuously: Addresses new and evolving threats through continuous updates to defenses against exfiltration risks and malware.
Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission Control: Manage and control end-user access to sensitive resources, including granular access controls.

Google Workspace	Manage and coordinate cyber-defense efforts through Mission Control: Manage and control end-user access to sensitive resources, including granular access controls.
Network Intelligence Center	Use the Intelligence function in all aspects of cyber defense: Provides visibility into network performance and detects unusual traffic patterns or data transfers.
Cloud NGFW	Validate and improve your defenses continuously: Optimizes network-based threat detection and response through integration with Security Command Center and Google SecOps.

Use AI securely and responsibly
This principle in the security pillar of the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework provides recommendations to help you secure your AI systems. These recommendations are aligned with Google's Secure AI Framework (SAIF), which provides a practical approach to address the security and risk concerns of AI systems. SAIF is a conceptual framework that aims to provide industry-wide standards for building and deploying AI responsibly.

Principle overview
To help ensure that your AI systems meet your security, privacy, and compliance requirements, you must adopt a holistic strategy that starts with the initial design and extends to deployment and operations. You can implement this holistic strategy by applying the six core elements of SAIF.

Google uses AI to enhance security measures, such as identifying threats, automating security tasks, and improving detection capabilities, while keeping humans in the loop for critical decisions.

Google emphasizes a collaborative approach to advancing AI security. This approach involves partnering with customers, industries, and governments to enhance the SAIF guidelines and offer practical, actionable resources.

The recommendations to implement this principle are grouped within the following sections:

Recommendations to use AI securely
Recommendations for AI governance
Recommendations to use AI securely
To use AI securely, you need both foundational security controls and AI-specific security controls. This section provides an overview of recommendations to ensure that your AI and ML deployments meet the security, privacy, and compliance requirements of your organization. For an overview of architectural principles and recommendations that are specific to AI and ML workloads in Google Cloud, see the AI and ML perspective in the Well-Architected Framework.

Define clear goals and requirements for AI usage
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the SAIF element about contextualizing AI system risks in the surrounding business processes. When you design and evolve AI systems, it's important to understand your specific business goals, risks, and compliance requirements.

Keep data secure and prevent loss or mishandling
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
Application security
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the following SAIF elements:

Expand strong security foundations to the AI ecosystem. This element includes data collection, storage, access control, and protection against data poisoning.
Contextualize AI system risks. Emphasize data security to support business objectives and compliance.
Keep AI pipelines secure and robust against tampering
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
Application security
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the following SAIF elements:

Expand strong security foundations to the AI ecosystem. As a key element of establishing a secure AI system, secure your code and model artifacts.
Adapt controls for faster feedback loops. Because it's important for mitigation and incident response, track your assets and pipeline runs.
Deploy apps on secure systems using secure tools and artifacts
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Infrastructure security
Identity and access management
Data security
Application security
AI and ML security
Using secure systems and validated tools and artifacts in AI-based applications aligns with the SAIF element about expanding strong security foundations to the AI ecosystem and supply chain. This recommendation can be addressed through the following steps:

Implement a secure environment for ML training and deployment
Use validated container images
Apply Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA) guidelines
Protect and monitor inputs
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Logging, auditing, and monitoring
Security operations
AI and ML security
This recommendation aligns with the SAIF element about extending detection and response to bring AI into an organization's threat universe. To prevent issues, it's critical to manage prompts for generative AI systems, monitor inputs, and control user access.

Recommendations for AI governance
All of the recommendations in this section are relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

Google Cloud offers a robust set of tools and services that you can use to build responsible and ethical AI systems. We also offer a framework of policies, procedures, and ethical considerations that can guide the development, deployment, and use of AI systems.

As reflected in our recommendations, Google's approach for AI governance is guided by the following principles:

Fairness
Transparency
Accountability
Privacy
Security
Use fairness indicators
Vertex AI can detect bias during the data collection or post-training evaluation process. Vertex AI provides model evaluation metrics like data bias and model bias to help you evaluate your model for bias.

These metrics are related to fairness across different categories like race, gender, and class. However, interpreting statistical deviations isn't a straightforward exercise, because differences across categories might not be a result of bias or a signal of harm.

Use Vertex Explainable AI
To understand how the AI models make decisions, use Vertex Explainable AI. This feature helps you to identify potential biases that might be hidden in the model's logic.

This explainability feature is integrated with BigQuery ML and Vertex AI, which provide feature-based explanations. You can either perform explainability in BigQuery ML or register your model in Vertex AI and perform explainability in Vertex AI.

Track data lineage
Track the origin and transformation of data that's used in your AI systems. This tracking helps you understand the data's journey and identify potential sources of bias or error.

Data lineage is a Dataplex Universal Catalog feature that lets you track how data moves through your systems: where it comes from, where it's passed to, and what transformations are applied to it.

Establish accountability
Establish clear responsibility for the development, deployment, and outcomes of your AI systems.

Use Cloud Logging to log key events and decisions made by your AI systems. The logs provide an audit trail to help you understand how the system is performing and identify areas for improvement.

Use Error Reporting to systematically analyze errors made by the AI systems. This analysis can reveal patterns that point to underlying biases or areas where the model needs further refinement.

Implement differential privacy
During model training, add noise to the data in order to make it difficult to identify individual data points but still enable the model to learn effectively. With SQL in BigQuery, you can transform the results of a query with differentially private aggregations.


Use AI for security
This principle in the security pillar of the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework provides recommendations to use AI to help you improve the security of your cloud workloads.

Because of the increasing number and sophistication of cyber attacks, it's important to take advantage of AI's potential to help improve security. AI can help to reduce the number of threats, reduce the manual effort required by security professionals, and help compensate for the scarcity of experts in the cyber-security domain.

Principle overview
Use AI capabilities to improve your existing security systems and processes. You can use Gemini in Security as well as the intrinsic AI capabilities that are built into Google Cloud services.

These AI capabilities can transform security by providing assistance across every stage of the security lifecycle. For example, you can use AI to do the following:

Analyze and explain potentially malicious code without reverse engineering.
Reduce repetitive work for cyber-security practitioners.
Use natural language to generate queries and interact with security event data.
Surface contextual information.
Offer recommendations for quick responses.
Aid in the remediation of events.
Summarize high-priority alerts for misconfigurations and vulnerabilities, highlight potential impacts, and recommend mitigations.
Levels of security autonomy
AI and automation can help you achieve better security outcomes when you're dealing with ever-evolving cyber-security threats. By using AI for security, you can achieve greater levels of autonomy to detect and prevent threats and improve your overall security posture. Google defines four levels of autonomy when you use AI for security, and they outline the increasing role of AI in assisting and eventually leading security tasks:

Manual: Humans run all of the security tasks (prevent, detect, prioritize, and respond) across the entire security lifecycle.
Assisted: AI tools, like Gemini, boost human productivity by summarizing information, generating insights, and making recommendations.
Semi-autonomous: AI takes primary responsibility for many security tasks and delegates to humans only when required.
Autonomous: AI acts as a trusted assistant that drives the security lifecycle based on your organization's goals and preferences, with minimal human intervention.
Recommendations
The following sections describe the recommendations for using AI for security. The sections also indicate how the recommendations align with Google's Secure AI Framework (SAIF) core elements and how they're relevant to the levels of security autonomy.

Enhance threat detection and response with AI
Simplify security for experts and non-experts
Automate time-consuming security tasks with AI
Incorporate AI into risk management and governance processes
Implement secure development practices for AI systems
Note: For more information about Google Cloud's overall vision for using Gemini across our products to accelerate AI for security, see the whitepaper Google Cloud's Product Vision for AI-Powered Security.
Enhance threat detection and response with AI
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Security operations (SecOps)
Logging, auditing, and monitoring
AI can analyze large volumes of security data, offer insights into threat actor behavior, and automate the analysis of potentially malicious code. This recommendation is aligned with the following SAIF elements:

Extend detection and response to bring AI into your organization's threat universe.
Automate defenses to keep pace with existing and new threats.
Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the following levels of autonomy:

Assisted: AI helps with threat analysis and detection.
Semi-autonomous: AI takes on more responsibility for the security task.
Google Threat Intelligence, which uses AI to analyze threat actor behavior and malicious code, can help you implement this recommendation.

Simplify security for experts and non-experts
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Security operations (SecOps)
Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
AI-powered tools can summarize alerts and recommend mitigations, and these capabilities can make security more accessible to a wider range of personnel. This recommendation is aligned with the following SAIF elements:

Automate defenses to keep pace with existing and new threats.
Harmonize platform-level controls to ensure consistent security across the organization.
Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the following levels of autonomy:

Assisted: AI helps you to improve the accessibility of security information.
Semi-autonomous: AI helps to make security practices more effective for all users.
Gemini in Security Command Center can provide summaries of alerts for misconfigurations and vulnerabilities.

Automate time-consuming security tasks with AI
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Infrastructure security
Security operations (SecOps)
Application security
AI can automate tasks such as analyzing malware, generating security rules, and identifying misconfigurations. These capabilities can help to reduce the workload on security teams and accelerate response times. This recommendation is aligned with the SAIF element about automating defenses to keep pace with existing and new threats.

Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the following levels of autonomy:

Assisted: AI helps you to automate tasks.
Semi-autonomous: AI takes primary responsibility for security tasks, and only requests human assistance when needed.
Gemini in Google SecOps can help to automate high-toil tasks by assisting analysts, retrieving relevant context, and making recommendations for next steps.

Incorporate AI into risk management and governance processes
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

You can use AI to build a model inventory and risk profiles. You can also use AI to implement policies for data privacy, cyber risk, and third-party risk. This recommendation is aligned with the SAIF element about contextualizing AI system risks in surrounding business processes.

Depending on your implementation, this recommendation can be relevant to the semi-autonomous level of autonomy. At this level, AI can orchestrate security agents that run processes to achieve your custom security goals.

Implement secure development practices for AI systems
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Application security
AI and ML security
You can use AI for secure coding, cleaning training data, and validating tools and artifacts. This recommendation is aligned with the SAIF element about expanding strong security foundations to the AI ecosystem.

This recommendation can be relevant to all levels of security autonomy, because a secure AI system needs to be in place before AI can be used effectively for security. The recommendation is most relevant to the assisted level, where security practices are augmented by AI.

To implement this recommendation, follow the Supply-chain Levels for Software Artifacts (SLSA) guidelines for AI artifacts and use validated container images.


Meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs
This principle in the security pillar of the Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework helps you identify and meet regulatory, compliance, and privacy requirements for cloud deployments. These requirements influence many of the decisions that you need to make about the security controls that must be used for your workloads in Google Cloud.

Principle overview
Meeting regulatory, compliance, and privacy needs is an unavoidable challenge for all businesses. Cloud regulatory requirements depend on several factors, including the following:

The laws and regulations that apply to your organization's physical locations
The laws and regulations that apply to your customers' physical locations
Your industry's regulatory requirements
Privacy regulations define how you can obtain, process, store, and manage your users' data. You own your own data, including the data that you receive from your users. Therefore, many privacy controls are your responsibility, including controls for cookies, session management, and obtaining user permission.

The recommendations to implement this principle are grouped within the following sections:

Recommendations to address organizational risks
Recommendations to address regulatory and compliance obligations
Recommendations to manage your data sovereignty
Recommendations to address privacy requirements
Recommendations to address organizational risks
This section provides recommendations to help you identify and address risks to your organization.

Identify risks to your organization
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

Before you create and deploy resources on Google Cloud, complete a risk assessment. This assessment should determine the security features that you need to meet your internal security requirements and external regulatory requirements.

Your risk assessment provides you with a catalog of organization-specific risks, and informs you about your organization's capability to detect and counteract security threats. You must perform a risk analysis immediately after deployment and whenever there are changes in your business needs, regulatory requirements, or threats to your organization.

As mentioned in the Implement security by design principle, your security risks in a cloud environment differ from on-premises risks. This difference is due to the shared responsibility model in the cloud, which varies by service (IaaS, PaaS, or SaaS) and your usage. Use a cloud-specific risk assessment framework like the Cloud Controls Matrix (CCM). Use threat modeling, like OWASP application threat modeling, to identify and address vulnerabilities. For expert help with risk assessments, contact your Google account representative or consult Google Cloud's partner directory.

After you catalog your risks, you must determine how to address them—that is, whether you want to accept, avoid, transfer, or mitigate the risks. For mitigation controls that you can implement, see the next section about mitigating your risks.

Mitigate your risks
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

When you adopt new public cloud services, you can mitigate risks by using technical controls, contractual protections, and third-party verifications or attestations.

Technical controls are features and technologies that you use to protect your environment. These include built-in cloud security controls like firewalls and logging. Technical controls can also include using third-party tools to reinforce or support your security strategy. There are two categories of technical controls:

You can implement Google Cloud's security controls to help you mitigate the risks that apply to your environment. For example, you can secure the connection between your on-premises networks and your cloud networks by using Cloud VPN and Cloud Interconnect.
Google has robust internal controls and auditing to protect against insider access to customer data. Our audit logs provide you with near real-time logs of Google administrator access on Google Cloud.
Contractual protections refer to the legal commitments made by us regarding Google Cloud services. Google is committed to maintaining and expanding our compliance portfolio. The Cloud Data Processing Addendum (CDPA) describes our commitments with regard to the processing and security of your data. The CDPA also outlines the access controls that limit Google support engineers' access to customers' environments, and it describes our rigorous logging and approval process. We recommend that you review Google Cloud's contractual controls with your legal and regulatory experts, and verify that they meet your requirements. If you need more information, contact your technical account representative.

Third-party verifications or attestations refer to having a third-party vendor audit the cloud provider to ensure that the provider meets compliance requirements. For example, to learn about Google Cloud attestations with regard to the ISO/IEC 27017 guidelines, see ISO/IEC 27017 - Compliance. To view the current Google Cloud certifications and letters of attestation, see Compliance resource center.

Recommendations to address regulatory and compliance obligations
A typical compliance journey has three stages: assessment, gap remediation, and continual monitoring. This section provides recommendations that you can use during each of these stages.

Assess your compliance needs
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

Compliance assessment starts with a thorough review of all of your regulatory obligations and how your business is implementing them. To help you with your assessment of Google Cloud services, use the Compliance resource center. This site provides information about the following:

Service support for various regulations
Google Cloud certifications and attestations
To better understand the compliance lifecycle at Google and how your requirements can be met, you can contact sales to request help from a Google compliance specialist. Or, you can contact your Google Cloud account manager to request a compliance workshop.

For more information about tools and resources that you can use to manage security and compliance for Google Cloud workloads, see Assuring Compliance in the Cloud.

Automate implementation of compliance requirements
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

To help you stay in compliance with changing regulations, determine whether you can automate how you implement compliance requirements. You can use both compliance-focused capabilities that Google Cloud provides and blueprints that use recommended configurations for a particular compliance regime.

Assured Workloads builds on the controls within Google Cloud to help you meet your compliance obligations. Assured Workloads lets you do the following:

Select your compliance regime. Then, the tool automatically sets the baseline personnel access controls for the selected regime.
Set the location for your data by using organization policies so that your data at rest and your resources remain only in that region.
Select the key-management option (such as the key rotation period) that best meets your security and compliance requirements.
Select the access criteria for Google support personnel to meet certain regulatory requirements such as FedRAMP Moderate. For example, you can select whether Google support personnel have completed the appropriate background checks.
Use Google-owned and Google-managed encryption keys that are FIPS-140-2 compliant and support FedRAMP Moderate compliance. For an added layer of control and for the separation of duties, you can use customer-managed encryption keys (CMEK). For more information about keys, see Encrypt data at rest and in transit.
In addition to Assured Workloads, you can use Google Cloud blueprints that are relevant to your compliance regime. You can modify these blueprints to incorporate your security policies into your infrastructure deployments.

To help you build an environment that supports your compliance requirements, Google's blueprints and solution guides include recommended configurations and provide Terraform modules. The following table lists blueprints that address security and alignment with compliance requirements.

Requirement	Blueprints and solution guides
FedRAMP	
Google Cloud FedRAMP implementation guide
Setting up a FedRAMP Aligned Three-Tier Workload on Google Cloud
HIPAA	
Protecting healthcare data on Google Cloud
Setting up a HIPAA-aligned workload using Data Protection Toolkit
Monitor your compliance
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Cloud governance, risk, and compliance
Logging, monitoring, and auditing
Most regulations require that you monitor particular activities, which include access-related activities. To help with your monitoring, you can use the following:

Access Transparency: View near real-time logs when Google Cloud administrators access your content.
Firewall Rules Logging: Record TCP and UDP connections inside a VPC network for any rules that you create. These logs can be useful for auditing network access or for providing early warning that the network is being used in an unapproved manner.
VPC Flow Logs: Record network traffic flows that are sent or received by VM instances.
Security Command Center Premium: Monitor for compliance with various standards.
OSSEC (or another open source tool): Log the activity of individuals who have administrator access to your environment.
Key Access Justifications: View the reasons for a key-access request.
Security Command Center notifications: Get alerts when noncompliance issues occur. For example, get alerts when users disable two-step verification or when service accounts are over-privileged. You can also set up automatic remediation for specific notifications.
Recommendations to manage your data sovereignty
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

Data sovereignty provides you with a mechanism to prevent Google from accessing your data. You approve access only for provider behaviors that you agree are necessary. For example, you can manage your data sovereignty in the following ways:

Store and manage encryption keys outside the cloud.
Grant access to these keys based on detailed access justifications.
Protect data in use by using Confidential Computing.
Manage your operational sovereignty
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

Operational sovereignty provides you with assurances that Google personnel can't compromise your workloads. For example, you can manage operational sovereignty in the following ways:

Restrict the deployment of new resources to specific provider regions.
Limit Google personnel access based on predefined attributes such as their citizenship or geographic location.
Manage software sovereignty
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

Software sovereignty provides you with assurances that you can control the availability of your workloads and run them wherever you want. Also, you can have this control without being dependent or locked in with a single cloud provider. Software sovereignty includes the ability to survive events that require you to quickly change where your workloads are deployed and what level of outside connection is allowed.

For example, to help you manage your software sovereignty, Google Cloud supports hybrid and multicloud deployments. If you choose on-premises deployments for data sovereignty reasons, Google Distributed Cloud is a combination of hardware and software that brings Google Cloud into your data center.

Recommendations to address privacy requirements
Google Cloud includes the following controls that promote privacy:

Default encryption of all data when it's at rest, when it's in transit, and while it's being processed.
Safeguards against insider access.
Support for numerous privacy regulations.
The following recommendations address additional controls that you can implement. For more information, see Privacy Resource Center.

Control data residency
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Cloud governance, risk, and compliance.

Data residency describes where your data is stored at rest. Data residency requirements vary based on system design objectives, industry regulatory concerns, national law, tax implications, and even culture.

Controlling data residency starts with the following:

Understand your data type and its location.
Determine what risks exist for your data and which laws and regulations apply.
Control where your data is stored or where it goes.
To help you comply with data residency requirements, Google Cloud lets you control where your data is stored, how it's accessed, and how it's processed. You can use resource location policies to restrict where resources are created and to limit where data is replicated between regions. You can use the location property of a resource to identify where the service is deployed and who maintains it. For more information, see Resource locations supported services.

Classify your confidential data
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus area: Data security.

You must define what data is confidential, and then ensure that the confidential data is properly protected. Confidential data can include credit card numbers, addresses, phone numbers, and other personally identifiable information (PII). Using Sensitive Data Protection, you can set up appropriate classifications. You can then tag and tokenize your data before you store it in Google Cloud. Additionally, Dataplex Universal Catalog offers a catalog service that provides a platform for storing, managing, and accessing your metadata. For more information and an example of data classification and de-identification, see De-identification and re-identification of PII using Sensitive Data Protection.

Lock down access to sensitive data
This recommendation is relevant to the following focus areas:

Data security
Identity and access management
Place sensitive data in its own service perimeter by using VPC Service Controls. VPC Service Controls improves your ability to mitigate the risk of unauthorized copying or transferring of data (data exfiltration) from Google-managed services. With VPC Service Controls, you configure security perimeters around the resources of your Google-managed services to control the movement of data across the perimeter. Set Google Identity and Access Management (IAM) access controls for that data. Configure multifactor authentication (MFA) for all users who require access to sensitive data.


Shared responsibilities and shared fate on Google Cloud
This document describes the differences between the shared responsibility model and shared fate in Google Cloud. It discusses the challenges and nuances of the shared responsibility model. This document describes what shared fate is and how we partner with our customers to address cloud security challenges.

Understanding the shared responsibility model is important when determining how to best protect your data and workloads on Google Cloud. The shared responsibility model describes the tasks that you have when it comes to security in the cloud and how these tasks are different for cloud providers.

Understanding shared responsibility, however, can be challenging. The model requires an in-depth understanding of each service you utilize, the configuration options that each service provides, and what Google Cloud does to secure the service. Every service has a different configuration profile, and it can be difficult to determine the best security configuration. Google believes that the shared responsibility model stops short of helping cloud customers achieve better security outcomes. Instead of shared responsibility, we believe in shared fate.

Shared fate includes us building and operating a trusted cloud platform for your workloads. We provide best practice guidance and secured, attested infrastructure code that you can use to deploy your workloads in a secure way. We release solutions that combine various Google Cloud services to solve complex security problems and we offer innovative insurance options to help you measure and mitigate the risks that you must accept. Shared fate involves us more closely interacting with you as you secure your resources on Google Cloud.

Shared responsibility
You're the expert in knowing the security and regulatory requirements for your business, and knowing the requirements for protecting your confidential data and resources. When you run your workloads on Google Cloud, you must identify the security controls that you need to configure in Google Cloud to help protect your confidential data and each workload. To decide which security controls to implement, you must consider the following factors:

Your regulatory compliance obligations
Your organization's security standards and risk management plan
Security requirements of your customers and your vendors
Defined by workloads
Traditionally, responsibilities are defined based on the type of workload that you're running and the cloud services that you require. Cloud services include the following categories:

Cloud service	Description
Infrastructure as a service (IaaS)	IaaS services include Compute Engine, Cloud Storage, and networking services such as Cloud VPN, Cloud Load Balancing, and Cloud DNS.
IaaS provides compute, storage, and network services on demand with pay-as-you-go pricing. You can use IaaS if you plan on migrating an existing on-premises workload to the cloud using lift-and-shift, or if you want to run your application on particular VMs, using specific databases or network configurations.

In IaaS, the bulk of the security responsibilities are yours, and our responsibilities are focused on the underlying infrastructure and physical security.

Platform as a service (PaaS)	PaaS services include App Engine, Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE), and BigQuery.
PaaS provides the runtime environment that you can develop and run your applications in. You can use PaaS if you're building an application (such as a website), and want to focus on development not on the underlying infrastructure.

In PaaS, we're responsible for more controls than in IaaS. Typically, this will vary by the services and features that you use. You share responsibility with us for application-level controls and IAM management. You remain responsible for your data security and client protection.

Software as a service (SaaS)	SaaS applications include Google Workspace, Google Security Operations, and third-party SaaS applications that are available in Google Cloud Marketplace.
SaaS provides online applications that you can subscribe to or pay for in some way. You can use SaaS applications when your enterprise doesn't have the internal expertise or business requirement to build the application themselves, but does require the ability to process workloads.

In SaaS, we own the bulk of the security responsibilities. You remain responsible for your access controls and the data that you choose to store in the application.

Function as a service (FaaS) or serverless	
FaaS provides the platform for developers to run small, single-purpose code (called functions) that run in response to particular events. You would use FaaS when you want particular things to occur based on a particular event. For example, you might create a function that runs whenever data is uploaded to Cloud Storage so that it can be classified.

FaaS has a similar shared responsibility list as SaaS. Cloud Run functions is a FaaS application.

The following diagram shows the cloud services and defines how responsibilities are shared between the cloud provider and customer.

Shared security responsibilities

As the diagram shows, the cloud provider always remains responsible for the underlying network and infrastructure, and customers always remain responsible for their access policies and data.

Defined by industry and regulatory framework
Various industries have regulatory frameworks that define the security controls that must be in place. When you move your workloads to the cloud, you must understand the following:

Which security controls are your responsibility
Which security controls are available as part of the cloud offering
Which default security controls are inherited
Inherited security controls (such as our default encryption and infrastructure controls) are controls that you can provide as part of your evidence of your security posture to auditors and regulators. For example, the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) defines regulations for payment processors. When you move your business to the cloud, these regulations are shared between you and your CSP. To understand how PCI DSS responsibilities are shared between you and Google Cloud, see Google Cloud: PCI DSS Shared Responsibility Matrix.

As another example, in the United States, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) has set standards for handling electronic personal health information (PHI). These responsibilities are also shared between the CSP and you. For more information on how Google Cloud meets our responsibilities under HIPAA, see HIPAA - Compliance.

Other industries (for example, finance or manufacturing) also have regulations that define how data can be gathered, processed, and stored. For more information about shared responsibility related to these, and how Google Cloud meets our responsibilities, see Compliance resource center.

Defined by location
Depending on your business scenario, you might need to consider your responsibilities based on the location of your business offices, your customers, and your data. Different countries and regions have created regulations that inform how you can process and store your customer's data. For example, if your business has customers who reside in the European Union, your business might need to abide by the requirements that are described in the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), and you might be obligated to keep your customer data in the EU itself. In this circumstance, you are responsible for ensuring that the data that you collect remains in the Google Cloud regions in the EU. For more information about how we meet our GDPR obligations, see GDPR and Google Cloud.

For information about the requirements related to your region, see Compliance offerings. If your scenario is particularly complicated, we recommend speaking with our sales team or one of our partners to help you evaluate your security responsibilities.

Challenges for shared responsibility
Though shared responsibility helps define the security roles that you or the cloud provider has, relying on shared responsibility can still create challenges. Consider the following scenarios:

Most cloud security breaches are the direct result of misconfiguration (listed as number 3 in the Cloud Security Alliance's Pandemic 11 Report) and this trend is expected to increase. Cloud products are constantly changing, and new ones are constantly being launched. Keeping up with constant change can seem overwhelming. Customers need cloud providers to provide them with opinionated best practices to help keep up with the change, starting with best practices by default and having a baseline secure configuration.
Though dividing items by cloud services is helpful, many enterprises have workloads that require multiple cloud services types. In this circumstance, you must consider how various security controls for these services interact, including whether they overlap between and across services. For example, you might have an on-premises application that you're migrating to Compute Engine, use Google Workspace for corporate email, and also run BigQuery to analyze data to improve your products.
Your business and markets are constantly changing; as regulations change, as you enter new markets, or as you acquire other companies. Your new markets might have different requirements, and your new acquisition might host their workloads on another cloud. To manage the constant changes, you must constantly re-assess your risk profile and be able to implement new controls quickly.
How and where to manage your data encryption keys is an important decision that ties with your responsibilities to protect your data. The option that you choose depends on your regulatory requirements, whether you're running a hybrid cloud environment or still have an on-premises environment, and the sensitivity of the data that you're processing and storing.
Incident management is an important, and often overlooked, area where your responsibilities and the cloud provider responsibilities aren't easily defined. Many incidents require close collaboration and support from the cloud provider to help investigate and mitigate them. Other incidents can result from poorly configured cloud resources or stolen credentials, and ensuring that you meet the best practices for securing your resources and accounts can be quite challenging.
Advanced persistent threats (APTs) and new vulnerabilities can impact your workloads in ways that you might not consider when you start your cloud transformation. Ensuring that you remain up-to-date on the changing landscape, and who is responsible for threat mitigation is difficult, particularly if your business doesn't have a large security team.
Shared fate
We developed shared fate in Google Cloud to start addressing the challenges that the shared responsibility model doesn't address. Shared fate focuses on how all parties can better interact to continuously improve security. Shared fate builds on the shared responsibility model because it views the relationship between cloud provider and customer as an ongoing partnership to improve security.

Shared fate is about us taking responsibility for making Google Cloud more secure. Shared fate includes helping you get started with a secured landing zone and being clear, opinionated, and transparent about recommended security controls, settings, and associated best practices. It includes helping you better quantify and manage your risk with cyber-insurance, using our Risk Protection Program. Using shared fate, we want to evolve from the standard shared responsibility framework to a better model that helps you secure your business and build trust in Google Cloud.

The following sections describe various components of shared fate.

Help getting started
A key component of shared fate is the resources that we provide to help you get started, in a secure configuration in Google Cloud. Starting with a secure configuration helps reduce the issue of misconfigurations which is the root cause of most security breaches.

Our resources include the following:

Enterprise foundations blueprint that discuss top security concerns and our top recommendations.
Secure blueprints that let you deploy and maintain secure solutions using infrastructure as code (IaC). Blueprints have our security recommendations enabled by default. Many blueprints are created by Google security teams and managed as products. This support means that they're updated regularly, go through a rigorous testing process, and receive attestations from third-party testing groups. Blueprints include the enterprise foundations blueprint and the secured data warehouse blueprint.

Google Cloud Well-Architected Framework recommendations for building security into your designs.

Landing zone navigation guides that step you through the top decisions that you need to make to build a secure foundation for your workloads, including resource hierarchy, identity onboarding, security and key management, and network structure.

Risk Protection Program
Shared fate also includes the Risk Protection Program (currently in preview), which helps you use the power of Google Cloud as a platform to manage risk, rather than just seeing cloud workloads as another source of risk that you need to manage. The Risk Protection Program is a collaboration between Google Cloud and two leading cyber insurance companies, Munich Re and Allianz Global & Corporate Speciality.

The Risk Protection Program includes Cyber Insurance Hub, which provides data-driven insights that you can use to better understand your cloud security posture. If you're looking for cyber insurance coverage, you can share these insights from Cyber Insurance Hub directly with our insurance partners to obtain a quote. For more information, see Google Cloud Risk Protection Program now in Preview.

Help with deployment and governance
Shared fate also helps with your continued governance of your environment. For example, we focus efforts on products such as the following:

Assured Workloads, which helps you meet your compliance obligations.
Security Command Center Premium, which uses threat intelligence, threat detection, web scanning, and other advanced methods to monitor and detect threats. It also provides a way to resolve many of these threats quickly and automatically.
Organization policies and resource settings that let you configure policies throughout your hierarchy of folders and projects.
Policy Intelligence tools that provide you with insights on access to accounts and resources.
Confidential Computing, which lets you encrypt data in use.
Sovereign Controls by Partners, which is available in certain countries and helps enforce data residency requirements.
Putting shared responsibility and shared fate into practice
As part of your planning process, consider the following actions to help you understand and implement appropriate security controls:

Create a list of the type of workloads that you will host in Google Cloud, and whether they require IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS services. You can use the shared responsibility diagram as a checklist to ensure that you know the security controls that you need to consider.
Create a list of regulatory requirements that you must comply with, and access resources in the Compliance resource center that relate to those requirements.
Review the list of available blueprints and architectures in the Architecture Center for the security controls that you require for your particular workloads. The blueprints provide a list of recommended controls and the IaC code that you require to deploy that architecture.
Use the landing zone documentation and the recommendations in the enterprise foundations guide to design a resource hierarchy and network architecture that meets your requirements. You can use the opinionated workload blueprints, like the secured data warehouse, to accelerate your development process.
After you deploy your workloads, verify that you're meeting your security responsibilities using services such as the Cyber Insurance Hub, Assured Workloads, Policy Intelligence tools, and Security Command Center Premium.
For more information, see the CISO's Guide to Cloud Transformation paper.